Task 1: Scan Your Docker Image for Vulnerabilities
Your Docker image might use a base image with known security issues. Let's find out.

Add this step to your main branch pipeline (after Docker build, before deploy):

- name: Scan Docker Image for Vulnerabilities
  uses: aquasecurity/trivy-action@master
  with:
    image-ref: 'your-username/your-app:latest'
    format: 'table'
    exit-code: '1'
    severity: 'CRITICAL,HIGH'
What this does:

trivy scans your Docker image for known CVEs (Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures)
format: 'table' prints a readable table in the logs
exit-code: '1' means fail the pipeline if CRITICAL or HIGH vulnerabilities are found
If it passes, your image is clean — proceed to push and deploy
Push and check the Actions tab. Read the scan output.

Verify: Can you see the vulnerability table in the logs? Did it pass or fail?

Write in your notes: What CVEs (if any) were found? What base image are you using?

Task 2: Enable GitHub's Built-in Secret Scanning
GitHub can automatically detect if someone pushes a secret (API key, token, password) to your repo.

Go to your repo → Settings → Code security and analysis
Enable Secret scanning
If available, also enable Push protection — this blocks the push entirely if a secret is detected
That's it — no workflow changes needed. GitHub does this automatically.

Write in your notes:

What is the difference between secret scanning and push protection?
What happens if GitHub detects a leaked AWS key in your repo?
Task 3: Scan Dependencies for Known Vulnerabilities
If your app uses packages (pip, npm, etc.), those packages might have known vulnerabilities.

Add this to your PR pipeline (not the main pipeline):

- name: Check Dependencies for Vulnerabilities
  uses: actions/dependency-review-action@v4
  with:
    fail-on-severity: critical
This checks any new dependencies added in the PR against a vulnerability database. If a dependency has a critical CVE, the PR check fails.

Test it:

Open a PR that adds a package to your app
Check the Actions tab — did the dependency review run?
Verify: Does the dependency review show up as a check on your PR?

Task 4: Add Permissions to Your Workflows
By default, workflows get broad permissions. Lock them down.

Add this block near the top of your workflow files (after on:):

permissions:
  contents: read
If a workflow needs to comment on PRs, add:

permissions:
  contents: read
  pull-requests: write
Update at least 2 of your existing workflow files with a permissions block.

Write in your notes: Why is it a good practice to limit workflow permissions? What could go wrong if a compromised action has write access to your repo?

Task 5: See the Full Secure Pipeline
Look at what your pipeline does now:

PR opened
  → build & test
  → dependency vulnerability check     ← NEW (Day 49)
  → PR checks pass or fail

Merge to main
  → build & test
  → Docker build
  → Trivy image scan (fail on CRITICAL) ← NEW (Day 49)
  → Docker push (only if scan passes)
  → deploy

Always active
  → GitHub secret scanning              ← NEW (Day 49)
  → push protection for secrets         ← NEW (Day 49)
Draw this diagram in your notes. You just built a DevSecOps pipeline — security is now part of your automation, not an afterthought.

